{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww8600\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \

\b \ul TITLE
\b0 \ulnone \
This semester, as I am a physics and CS double major, I wanted to see how physics models can be implemented in computers. Hence, I decided to study a field known as chaotic scattering, with the help of a simulation modelling a skateboarder riding across hills and valleys\
\
\

\b \ul SLIDE 1: Chaos Theory + Pic of Ed
\b0 \ulnone \
However, before we go into chaotic scattering, I would like to discuss its origins, which lies in Chaos theory, a branch of non linear dynamics. Chaos Theory can in a way be said to be the science of Surprises - since It deals with the unpredictably of complex systems.\
\
This field was discovered accidentally, when
\f1  Dr. Lorenz was running simulations of weather using a simple computer model, based on a set of equations he created.\
\

\b \ul SLIDE 2: RUN OF CONVECTION CURRENT SIMULATION
\b0 \ulnone \
\
His model was trying to predict that patterns of convection currents in the air. This is a run of what a model of his equations produce. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0  One day, he rounded one of his several input parameters from 6DP to 3DP. He expected his results to be relatively similar, however, found  that  the two weather trajectories quickly diverged on completely separate paths.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \

\b \ul SLIDE 3: TWO DIFFERENT PLOTS OF CONVECTION CURRENTS
\b0 \ulnone \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
This can be seen by the plot above\
\
The difference between the two plots is that the initial parameters have been altered by a factor of 1/100th\
\

\b \ul SLIDE 4 : LORENZ EPIPHANY
\b0 \ulnone \
\
DR. L was shocked by these results, and came to realise that small changes in complex systems can result in very different outcomes. He wrote about this in the paper titled \'93 Does the flap of a B\'92s wings in Brazil set off a tornado in texas\'94. This paper which give birth to what we know as the \'91butterfly effect\'92 also gave rise to the field of chaos theory\
\
\

\b \ul SLIDE 5: CHAOS SCATTERING
\b0 \ulnone \
\
 chaos scattering, is just a branch of chaos theory, which deals with how trajectories can change drastically with small changes in its initial parameters.\
\
\
\ul USES OF SCATTERING\ulnone \
This field of study was just created cause someone decided to throw rice around  - it was actually created to get a better understanding of dynamics going on in our space, such as how comets interacted with various planets near them. Chaotic scattering has also been used to get a better understand how alpha particles interact with gold atom in nuclear physics,  and in various other places\
\
\ul GASPARD RICE MODEL\ulnone \
The first study done in this field involves a rice grain being shot at four solid discs as seen in the figure. The rice would enter from a certain region, and then after bouncing around the discs, would shoot out at a certain angle. The hight at which the rice enters from is called \'91b\'92 as seen from the image.\
\
\
\
\

\b \ul SLIDE 6: ODEs
\b0 \ulnone \
So before we look at the simulation, I would like to talk about how many physics simulations model motion. \
\
So on the screen, we have Newton\'92s second law of motion, Force = mass times acceleration.  This equation is known as an ordinary differential equation, as its an equation which contains derivatives of some variable.\
\
In this case, the equation contains the second derivative of position, Acceleration. Hence, by integrating the acceleration at a given instance of time, we can obtain the position of the mass at the same instance of time.  This is what I use in my simulation to calculate the position of the skater.\
\
\

\b \ul SLIDE 7: NUMERICAL INTEGRATION
\b0 \ulnone \
\
The way we do the integration is very similar to what you guys might have seen in calc 112, with Simpson\'92s method. If the red curve is what we want to integrate, we evaluate the value of the function at different points, and create rectangles whose area we add up. The area gives us the value of the integral.\
\
There are different  ways of doing the integration. In most physics simulations, methods like Euler Cromer, and Runge Kutta are implemented. In my simulation, I have implemented five different ways of carrying out the integration in the simulation. \
\
\

\b \ul SHOW SOFTWARE SLIDE 8
\b0 \ulnone \
\
*set at b=0.71*\
\
So here we have the simulation of the skateboarder ( the black dot) and the skatepark, with the valleys as seen by the contour plot. The position on the y axis is known as \'91b\'92 the impact parameter. \
\
Currently this is using Euler Cromer integration. If we switch to the others, see how the path changes? \
*Toggle bw dif integration*\
\
Range Kutta 4 has the most accurate path, which we will discuss later.\
\
*zoom out*\
\
Lets see what happens as we move the initial path by small values \
*start moving around*\
- it appears as though even small changes makes the path change by drastic amounts!\
\
\
*change to hills now*\
Now lets switch the skatepark so that instead of valleys, we have hills.\
As you can see, now the skateboarders path has changed drastically. However, we still see that by changing the initial position by small amounts, the final path changes.\
\
*start moving around - leave at a direct position near the hill *\
One more quick thing, lets see what happens as we increase the initial velocity of the particle. \
\
*increase the velocity slowly, showing how as energy increases path changes.* \
We see that the skateboarder slowly gets more and more energy to go up to a higher point on the hill, and eventually can jump across the hill. \
\
*change to valleys - decrease the velocity *\
And also, I just wanted to show how the we get really cool paths for the skateboarder if we switch back to the valleys at low velocities.\
\
\ul \

\b SLIDE 9: RESULTS
\b0 \ulnone \
\
Using the simulation, I ran various experiments and saved data to study how changing the y position of the skateboarder affected the scattering angle, how different initial velocities of the skateboarder gave different scattering angles, and studied how the energy of the skateboarder altered through the progression of his travel through the skatepark. \
\
There were some other tests I ran, studying the different integration techniques, however, we will not be discussing those today.\
\
\ul Chaotic vs non \ulnone -  So here is a plot comparing the initial y position of the skateboarder agains the scattering angle.  As you can see, as the initial y position is increased, the initial scattering angle changes in a steady, smooth, manner.  However, there are certain regions in which small increments in the initial position cause the scattering angle to fluctuate very rapidly. This is the chaotic regions in the graph.\
\
\
\ul FRACTAL -\ulnone  Whats even more interesting, is that if we take a chaotic region, and try to expand it in the region where it appears chaotic, to try to get a better understanding of whats going on, \
we see more chaotic regions with some non chaotic regions, \
and then even more\
and more of the same repeating pattern. This shows us that the nature of this system actually has fractal properties! \
\
\ul Energy \ulnone -  So now some of you might be wondering how I know that my data is actually accurate and not just a bunch of baloney.\
\
So I can argue that it is accurate with Runge Kutta 4, because if I plot the energy of the skateboarder as he travels through the park, I see that this is constant. \
\
In physics, we know that energy cannot be created or destroyed. Hence, as the skateboarders energy is being conserved, we can say that the integrations being done are accurate, and hence the paths taken by the skateboarder are accurate. \
\
This is just a zoom in of the same energy plot, showing that there is some variation in the energy but not so much that the integration becomes greatly inaccurate. \
\

\b Slide 10 : CONCLUDING NOTES
\b0 \
\
Yup, so thats pretty much it!  I hope you guys found that interesting, and if anything, realised that \
- its not actually butterflies which cause chaos in our world, \
- but the sensitive nature of systems which causes the chaos.\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
}